# Lecture 1

## The ERM Librarian

**Date: 17 Aug 2020**

This semester we're learning about electronic resources and a bit about how to
manage them. We begin first by outlining the kinds of things that are
electronic resources. [Karin Wikoff][1] (2011) outlines the major categories,
and these include:

- databases
    - A&I databases (abstracting and indexing) / bibliographic databases
    - full text databases
    - journal collections, like Project Muse or JSTOR
    - specialized and hybrid databases, like chemical databases,
      genetic databases, stock and business databases
    - primary source databases, like original newspaper databases,
      oral histories, and like
- e-journals
    - open access or proprietary, and the issues associated with
      these types
- e-books
    - one note about e-books---here the technology is rather complex
      and differentiated depending on the copyright status, the
      file type (PDF, ePUB, TXT, etc.), the purpose or genre (textbook,
      fiction or non-fiction, etc.). In many cases, e-books are
      software applications and not just plain or marked up text, and
      they also vary by platform or the application interacting
      with the text, which offer different types of functionality.
- linking technologies, e.g., where metadata is embedded in a URL and
  is sent across networks, these include:
    - Z39.50
    - OpenURL
    - Federated search

The promise of linking technologies is that it allows a user to start off in
one system, like an OPAC, and expand a query to other systems without going out
and initiating searches in those other systems. For example, a user starts off
at WorldCat.org and finds a book that's available at a nearby library. The user
only needs to click on the local library link and be transferred to that
library's OPAC.

As you surmise from the above list, electronic resources are now a major part
of any library, whether academic, public, school, or special. And the need to
manage them and incorporate them into a library work flow is of utter
importance. This will be much of what we'll discuss and learn about this
semester. And it will be complicated. The print only era of libraries was
difficult enough for many reasons, but electronic resources have raised the
ante. Just think, civilizations have had 500 years to develop and solve print
technology, yet we've had only about four or five decades of experience with
digital technology. We're a long way off from settling on anything stable and
still face challenges and frustrations. 

## Our Readings: The nature of ERM librarianship

Our readings this week provide nice introductions to electronic resource
librarianship and help frame this entire course. The first article by Stachokas
surveys part of the history of this specialist librarian role and then reports
on a study of the work the electronic resource librarian performs today and
where she or he is likely to work in the library. We'll discuss this in our
forum.

In the second article, Hulseberg uses the field of technical communication (TC)
to interpret the field of electronic resource librarianship. Hulseberg takes
the view that an electronic resource librarian is, perhaps among other things,
a technical communicator. This is much different than being someone who simply
helps patrons with their technical problems. Rather, this is someone who
completes advanced work in documenting and reporting technical processes. 

Hulseberg highlights four important themes about ERM: an interesting theme to
me is *Theme Two: Collaborating in a "web of relationships."* When I was an
undergraduate, I imagined the job that I wanted would be one involving
connecting people in different silos to each other and helping them
communicate, which is often harder than it sounds. It turns out electronic
resource librarianship is about this work. However, the other themes are just
as important, and in particular, theme four, about jurisdiction, highlights one
of the major disruptive acts on librarianship in the last thirty or forty
years. Consider, for example, that most people, researchers and scholars
included, use non-library provided resources to locate information.
Additionally, more works, scholarly and non-scholarly, are freely and publicly
available as open access or like. Jointly, this means, perhaps, that the
library, academic, public, and more, is hypothetically becoming
disintermediated as a result of people using sites like Google Scholar to
retrieve works freely available on the web. As a result, what becomes of the
core jurisdiction of the librarian? And of the electronic resource librarian,
in particular? In concrete terms: a [recent paper][2] reported that researchers
in their survey stated they use Google Scholar 83% of the time and EBSCOhost
29% of the time to find relevant material. That raises questions, strategic and
technical ones, about the role of the librarian and library.

The third article, by Zhu, places an entirely different theoretical lens on
what it means to be an electronic resource librarian. Here Zhu posits that the
licensing aspect of electronic resource management has had a major influence on
ER librarianship identity. We spend some time this semester discussing
licensing because it informs a fundamental aspect of the work of electronic
resource management. One reason why Zhu's findings are insightful is because of
the nature of electronic resources and the problems with copyright law, which
is brutish in dealing with digital works. Copyright law, historically, has
provided librarians with their most important legal justification for
collecting works, and while no one could prove a counterfactual like this, it
could be that if the internet and the web had been created before the modern
library, then libraries might not exist, because such a legal justification
would not have existed. However, libraries exist, of course, but the
introduction of digital and electronic resources has resulted in substantial
disruptions, organizational changes, and other issues. I'll ask you to discuss
the details of Zhu's article on the boards.

Stachokas, Hulseberg, and Zhu present the historical and environmental forces
that have shaped these views of this work and these identities, and they each
discuss important themes that function as evidence of these identities. In your
discussions this week, focus on these themes and how you make sense of it all.

In conclusion, this semester we'll be exposed to a number of new technologies
that an electronic resource librarian deals with and also the implications of
those technologies on the social aspects of our work. These aspects include our
work flows, our organizational structures, our measurement activities, design
and usability, security, access, licensing and negotiating. As we start to
address all of this, I want us to consider two questions:

1. How do we manage all of this electronic stuff? Not only does it include
   complicated technology and has an impact on our patrons, but it involves of
   different sorts of librarians.
2. What exactly is an electronic resource librarian? I like this basic question
   because, due to perhaps representations in the media (movies, TV shows,
   books) and the interactions we've had with librarians in our lifetimes, we
   all have pretty well-defined, whether or not accurate, images of what
   reference or cataloging librarians are. But what about an electronic
   resource librarian? This is something different, right? And it's not likely
   to be a position that's ever really captured and presented publicly.

Keep this these questions in consideration when you read the material this week.

See you on the boards.

## References

Wikoff, K. (2011). Electronics Resources Management in the Academic
Library: A Professional Guide. ABC-CLIO.

[1]:http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/940697515
[2]:https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-03-2018-0047
