# Desperately Seeking an ERM Librarian
## Date: Mon 24 Aug 2020 

Class, we read two articles this week that analyze electronic resource
librarian job advertisements. Our goal is to understand how the job has changed
throughout the years.

These articles were published a handful of years ago and are of historical
interest since they capture a description of electronic resource librarianship
that is continually evolving. I wouldn't call them dated, though. It's true the
technology has advanced, but the descriptions of ER jobs are still on the mark.
I posted links to current job announcements in the discussion forum to help
support this argument. The job announcements were emailed via the SERIALST
email list and are not current job openings, but they were current within the
last two years. To stay current about the position, I encourage you to bookmark
and stay abreast of relevant journals in the area. For example, pay attention
and bookmark the [Journal of Electronic Resources Librarianship][1]. 

A big change since 2012, when Harnett's research ends, is that technology has
moved to the cloud and we manage less technology on on-site servers. This has
had substantial implications. One implication is libraries will (and this is
a hypothesis) require fewer local IT skill sets on hand because the work of
installing, maintaining, and updating the software will reside on remote
systems hosted by the vendors instead of on on-site. Although I state this as
a hypothesis, we already know that this statement rings true for some of you.
This isn't necessarily a good or bad thing. Another hypothesis: it could mean
other skill sets become more dominant. Specifically, hosted means the software
isn't purchased but leased, and leasing involves repeated negotiations. Thus,
the kind of work that may increase, as more software is hosted on the cloud,
might be the kind of work requiring strong communication skills, strong
negotiating skills, a good understanding of how licensing works as more is
licensed. However, again, this can be complicated. Note the announcement I made
about the recent email on SERIALST. Respondents to that email about whether
librarians have retained or hold negotiating and contract signing powers has
been mixed. Some librarians have the jurisdiction but many have lost it.

Even though IT continues to be outsourced, this doesn't mean that we can become
lax in our understanding of how the technology works---that which requires
a thorough understanding of the *electronic* in electronic resources---just as
we can't become lax in how librarianship works even though librarians answer
fewer reference questions than they did in previous years. What I mean is
that, in order to communicate this topic well, to negotiate well, and to sign
licenses that are beneficial to our stakeholders, it still helps to understand
and be adept at the tech so that we are not bamboozled in those negotiations.
Also, if something goes wrong, like with the link resolver technology, we have
to learn how to identify the likely culprit; that is, whether the technological
issue is the link resolver technology and not something else, like the OPAC
technology.

This week I want you to think about these job advertisement studies in relation
to what you know now about electronic resources as well as in relation to the
kinds of advertisements you've seen. By the time this lecture is released you
may have seen some ads sent on the SERIALST mailing list that I've asked you to
subscribe to this semester (and as mentioned above, in case none have been
forwarded while you've been subscribed, I'll share some that I've seen). Some
of you may be graduating soon and are likely looking for employment. If so,
feel free to comment on your experience with such advertisements. In essence,
think about where you see yourself in these advertisements and how they impact
you.

Although you may have only learned about these technologies abstractly, that
is, most of you haven't had a chance to learn the back ends, that doesn't
disqualify you from this exercise. You've gathered enough abstract knowledge to
know enough, and when you add to your front end knowledge (that is, your use of
these technologies as students, users, etc.), you have enough to be capable of
adding some self-context. In short, this is the second part of our exercise in
self-reflection; it's an attempt to flush out how we have internalized the
information we've learned this semester and convert it into knowledge that we
can use as librarians or as information professionals, writ-large. Just a hint
of what's to come in the future, we will use and get some exposure to
electronic resource management software in an upcoming week.

We'll soon move away from reflective questions and get our hands dirty with
specific technologies, licensing, etc., but for now let's think about the
following:

- Where do you think you stand in comparison to ERM job ads?
    - Where are you strong?
    - Where would you like to improve?
- What can you (and we, as a course community) do to help each of you
  get there?
    - What's your path?
    - What can you practice?

[1]:https://www.tandfonline.com/toc/wacq20/current
