# Lecture 3: Constant Disruption

The first listed reading we have this week is by Marshall Breeding. Astute
observers will note Breeding is one of the first cited in the two
additional readings we have this week. We will read more from Breeding later in
the semester, but I bring him up now because he oversees a website titled
[Library Technology Guides][LTGuides] at librarytechnology.org. If you would like to
keep abreast of the recent news on the electronic resource industry, Breeding's
website should be at the top of your list.

Breeding's *What is ERM?* article is a good one to start the week. He provides
not only a nice outline of the various components of electronic resources, but
he also provides some historical context for those components. One caveat: all
the articles on our list this week are focused on academic libraries. I am
afraid not much literature (that I have seen, at least) provides the same level
of information from other library types. I think that librarians in other
libraries publish less often than academic librarians, who are often required
to publish for tenure, and when they do publish, they generally publish on
other topics. However, the same processes our articles describe generally hold
for other types of libraries. Differences in processes and in some details will
arise, though, due to organizational or other contextual issues. For example,
public libraries are often tightly connected to municipalities or county
governments and to state libraries and consortia. Not only does that raise
organizational challenges, but it highlights the fact that municipal, county,
or state laws will define how some processes must be handled and who must
handle them. The same is true for public schools, and in such cases, school
boards and school districts will likely be involved. Also, different library
types will draw from different publishers. Academic libraries will require more
scholarly sources, and public libraries provide more ebooks and audiobooks and
less e-journals. These differences in needs, due to different communities, will
change the emphasis on some aspects of the ERM work flow.

I understand some terms Breeding uses and the technologies he describes might
be foreign right now. I am not rehashing or summarizing these articles here; we
will simply discuss them on the boards, but let me spend some time providing
some additional background information and highlighting some things to look for
in these three articles.

As I have previously mentioned, librarians started to migrate to electronic
management since the 1970s. Breeding mentions this. It actually started well
before this. I published [a paper][burns2013] a few years ago that provides
a historical account of the first library automation project, which took place
in the 1930s with [Hollerith punched cards][punched_cards]. By the 1960s, the
primary use of computers was to manage circulation, and then patron records
around the 1960s and 1970s. In the early 1970s, tools became available to
manage and search bibliographic records. Hence, computers were first used
mostly to manage the circulation of books, then to add patron records, which
allowed patrons to check out works electronically. Eventually we had the
ability to search for works. If a work of interest was located using these
tools, the work could be retrieved from the shelves or ordered via interlibrary
loan by snail mail. Full text search came much later with the introduction of
better storage media, like CD-ROMs, and saw major growth with the introduction
of the web in the early 1990s, which at its heart is nothing more than a big
document retrieval system.

In the process of migrating from print to electronic, all sorts of things had
to change, but they all rest on the major premise of all librarianship: *that
we organize information to retrieve information*. Although you may have often
heard that libraries are ancient things, libraries and librarianship did not
modernize until the 1920s and 1930s when some in the profession began to hone
in on the major complexities and challenges, social and technological, involved
in organizing and retrieving information. The challenges with organizing and
retrieving information they identified nearly 100 years ago were indeed major
and problematic, but fortuitous, because it gave rise to what we now called
*library science*.

Yet consider when those people laid the groundwork for a library science,
librarians only managed print and the primary means of accessing print
collections was through a physical building. With the introduction of computer
systems in the 1960s and with better networking technologies in the 1980s and
1990s, issues with organizing and retrieving information grew exponentially,
and indeed, this exponential increase in complex issues launched an entire new
field, what we now call *information science*.

All right, back to the ground level. Let me highlight some key terms in
Breeding's article. They include:

* Finding aids
* Knowledge bases
* OpenURL link resolvers
* ERM systems
* Library service platforms
* Integrated library systems (ILS)

Unless you already have some solid experience with these things, and even after
reading Breeding's nice article, these terms may still be abstract. So, this
week, you have two major tasks:

1. Find real, practical examples. Pick one or two of the above terms and see
   how they work in practice. Then come back here and tell us what you found.
   Use the articles to help you locate actual products or examples.
2. Locate how these terms appear in either the Cote and Ostergaard (2017)
   article or the Fu and Carmen (2015). Note other terms that may appear in
   those two articles and comment on the role they play in the ERM work flow
   and the migration process.

As you work on this, I ask of you pay attention to the emphasis on work flow.
We read the Cote and Ostergaard article and the Fu and Carmen article because
migrating to new systems is a major, expensive, and time-consuming project and
thus there exists a need to write and publish articles on migration topics.
Other librarians need to know about this. In the print era, there were some
cases where librarians had to migrate to new systems, too. For example, some
research libraries in the U.S. started by classifying collections using the
Dewey Decimal Classification system, but then began to convert to the Library
of Congress Classification system. This was no small task, but it was also not
that common. Today, migration is big business in the library world because the
technology changes so fast and because there are a number of competing
electronic resource management products that librarians have to choose from,
and feel obliged to do when those products provide advantages to their users,
communities, and themselves.

[LTGuides]:https://librarytechnology.org/
[punched_cards]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punched_card
[burns2013]:https://muse.jhu.edu/article/534487
