# Workflow
## Date: Thu 27 Feb 2019 

If all goes according to plan, this week's readings on electronic
resource management and on workflow analysis should help you put prior
material into some context and also act as a bridge to the material to
that we'll discuss in much of the remaining weeks of the semester.

In the first couple of weeks, we read about what it means to be a
librarian who oversees or is a part of electronic resource management as
well as what kinds of criteria are sought for in new hires. We also
discussed why electronic resources have introduced so much *constant
disruption* across libraries which, among other things, is due to the
fact that the print-era involved a largely linear process of collection
management that was fundamentally altered with the introduction of
electronic resources.

Then we discussed the differences between electronic resource management
software and integrated library system software, as well as why
standards are important, why interoperability is required, and what
happens when access to electronic resources breaks.

This week I think things will start to connect for you all at an even
faster pace. In the first Anderson article (chapter 2), we start to get
a clear idea of what a knowledge base is and how it works, we learn more
about how integrated library systems and ERM systems work together,
or not, and more. We also start dipping our toes into newer topics, such
as licensing, COUNTER, and SUSHI, which we'll cover in greater detail in
the next few weeks.

In the second Anderson article (chapter 3), we learn how to take careful
consideration of a library's work flow before selecting which ERM
software to purchase, and we do this because we select systems based on
the needs of the librarians, which may be vastly different across
libraries and which must rely on different aspects of the overall
process. As you read this chapter, I want you to keep in mind the
Samples and Healy article from the previous week's reading. 

As hinted at in these readings, especially in the section on
acquisitions, budget, subscription, and purchasing in Chapter 2 but also
in the multiple discussions about the role that vendors play in
electronic resource management, the market and the economics of this
area of librarianship weighs heavily on everyday realities. We'll follow
up on this next week when we begin to read more about the market and the
economics of electronic resources. For example, in our Anderson readings
this week, we learn about the CORE standard, or the *Cost of Resource
Exchange* standard, that was developed by NISO and that brings together
three aspects of our previous discussions: software, funds, and
interoperability. Here the CORE standard is simply a standard that
enables ILS and ERM systems to communicate costs of electronic resources
between each other, and its existence hints at the pressures librarians
have had in having to deal with complex budget issues.

We have already discussed standardization. While we spent some time
discussing technical standards, we also learned a bit about TERMS, an
attempt to standardize some of the language and processes involved with
electronic resource management. We see more connections in this week's
readings. Aside from the CORE standard, we learn, as previously stated,
about standard attempts at licensing, and the *COUNTER* and *SUSHI*
statistic-related standards, which provide standards for the
communication, collection, presentation, and the formats of usage
statistics for electronic resources such as ebooks, journals, databases,
and more.

We have also discussed interoperability, and what it takes for multiple
systems to connect and transfer content between each other. We primarily
discussed this with respect to link resolver technology, and we did this
not just because we should know about link resolvers as important
components of electronic resource management, but also because link
resolvers are a good example of the kind of work that is involved for
systems to communicate properly. Coming back to *CORE* again, the
Anderson article (chapter 2) provides a link to a white paper titled,
"White Paper on Interoperability between Acquisitions Modules of
Integrated Library Systems and Electronic Resource Management Systems",
and this paper defines the 13 data elements that were determined to be
desired in any exchange between ILS software and ERM software for those
software to communicate meaningfully with each other. By that, I mean,
the data points enable meaningful use of both the ILS software and the
ERM software, and [include][1]:

* purchase order number
* price
* start/end dates
* vendor
* vendor ID
* invoice number
* fund code
* invoice date
* selector
* vendor contact information
* purchase order note
* line item note
* invoice note (White Paper ...)

[1]:https://old.diglib.org/standards/ERMI_Interop_Report_20080108.pdf

That white paper contains a lot of interesting use cases, or stories,
from several major libraries, and these cases are rather interesting
reads. You're not required to read this paper, but I urge you at least
skim through it so you get a sense of how standards are created through
a process of comparing and contrasting and coordinating needs and
contexts among different entities. Link is in the transcript but also in
the reading, as well as the link to the actual [CORE protocol][2]:

[2]:http://www.niso.org/workrooms/core

I really like these two readings by Anderson because they've very
illustrative of the whole ERM process. If you're interested, visit the
issue these two readings are from and read the other parts that Anderson
has written.

In short, this week's topic will also, if all goes well, help provide a
foundation for the remaining weeks, when we'll learn about and discuss
things like licensing and negotiation and evaluation and statistics in
more detail.
