# The ERM Librarian
## Date: Wed 09 Jan 2019 

This semester we're learning about electronic resources and a bit about
how to manage them. We can begin first by outlining the kinds of things
that are electronic resources. [Karin Wikoff][1] (2011) outlines the
major categories, and these include:

- databases
    - A&I databases (abstracting and indexing) / bibliographic databases
    - full text databases
    - journal collections, such as Project Muse or JSTOR
    - specialized and hybrid databases, such as chemical databases,
      genetic databases, stock and business databases
    - primary source databases, such as original newspaper databases,
      oral histories, and like
- e-journals
    - open access or proprietary, and all the issues associated with
      these types
- e-books
    - one note about e-books -- here the technology is rather complex
      and differentiated dependinig on the copyright status, the
      filetype (PDF, ePUB, TXT, etc.), the purpose or genre (textbook,
      fiction or non-fiction, etc.). In many cases, e-books may be
      considered applications and not just plain or marked up text, and
      they also vary by platform or the application used to interact
      with the text, which may offer different types of functionality.
- linking technologies, e.g., where metadata is embedded in a URL and
  sent across networks, these include:
    - Z39.50
    - OpenURL
    - Federated search

The promise of linking technologies is that a user would be able to
start off in one system, such as an OPAC, and expand a query to other
systems without going out and initiating searches in those other
systems. For example, a user may start off at WorldCat.org and find a
book that's available at a nearby library. The user would only need to
click on the local library link and be transferred to that library's
OPAC.

As you can from the above list, electronic resources are now a major
part of any library, whether academic, public, school, or special. And
the need to manage them and incorporate them into a library work flow is
of utter importance. This will be much of what we'll discuss and learn
about this semester. And it will be complicated. The print only era of
libraries was difficult enough for many reasons, but electronic
resources have raised the ante. Just think, civilizations have had 500
years to work out print technology, yet we've had only about four or so
decades to figure out digital technology. We're a long way off from
settling on anything stable and still face quite a few challenges and
frustrations. 

## Our Readings -- the nature of ERM librarianship

Our readings this week function as nice introductions to the role of the
electronic resource librarian and really set the stage and framework for
this entire course. The first article by Stachokas surveys part of the
history of this specialist librarian role and then reports on a recent
study of what the electronic resource librarian does today and where she
or he is likely to be found. We'll talk about this in our discussion
forum.

In the second article, Hulseberg uses the field of technical
communication (TC) to interpret the field of electronic resource
librarianship. That is, Hulseberg takes the view that an electronic
resource librarian is, perhaps among other things, a technical
communicator. This is much different than being someone who simply helps
patrons with their technical problems. Rather, this is someone who does
advanced work in documenting and reporting technical processes. 

Hulseberg highlights four important themes about ERM: one of the most
attractive to me is *Theme Two: Collaborating in a "web of
relationships."* When I was an undergraduate, I imagined the kind of job
that I would like would be one that would involve connecting people
coming from different silos to each other and helping them communicate,
which is often harder than it sounds. It turns out electronic resource
librarianship is about this kind of work. However, the other themes are
just as important, and in particular, theme four, about jurisdiction,
highlights one of the most disruptive acts on librarianship in the last
thirty or forty years. Consider, for example, that most people,
researchers and scholars included, use non-library provided resources to
locate information. Additionally, more work, scholarly and non, has
become more freely available to the public as open access or like.
Jointly, this means, perhaps, that the library, academic, public, and
more, is hypothetically becoming disintermediated as a result of people
using sites like Google Scholar to retrieve works freely available on
the web. As a result, what becomes of the core jurisdiction of the
librarian? And of the electronic resource librarian, in particular? To
put this in concrete terms: a [recent paper][2] reported that
researchers in their survey stated they use Google Scholar 83% of the
time and EBSCOhost 29% of the time to find relevant material. That
raises questions, strategic and technical ones, about the role of the
librarian and library.

The third article, by Zhu, places an entirely different theoretical lens
on what it means to be an electronic resource librarian. Here Zhu posits
that the licensing aspect of electronic resource management has been a
major influence on ER librarianship identity. We will spend some time
this semester discussing licensing because it is a fundamental aspect of
the work. The reason why Zhu's findings are insightful is because of the
nature of electronic resources and the problems with copyright law,
which has been largely ineffective in dealing with digital works.
Copyright law, historically, has provided libraries with its most
important legal justification for collecting works, and while no one
could prove a counterfactual like this, it could be that if the internet
and the web had been created before the modern library, then libraries
might not exist at all, because such a legal justification would not
have existed. However, they do, of course, but the introduction of
digital and electronic resources has resulted in substantial
disruptions, organizational changes, and other issues. I'll ask you to
discuss the details of Zhu's article on the boards.

Stachokas, Hulseberg, and Zhu present the historical and environmental
forces that have shaped these views of this work and these identities,
and they each discuss various important themes that function as evidence
of these identities. In your discussions this week, focus on these
themes and talk about how you make sense of it all.

In conclusion, this semester we'll be exposed to a number of new
technologies that an electronic resource librarian must deal with and
also the implications of those technologies on the social aspects of our
work. These aspects include our work flows, our organizational
structures, our measurement activities, design and usability, security,
access, licensing and negotiating, and so forth. As we start to look
forward to look all of this, we might consider two questions:

1. How do we manage all of this electronic stuff? Not only does it
   include a lot of technology and has an impact on our patrons, but it
   also may involve a lot of librarians.
2. What exactly is an electronic resource librarian? I like this basic
   question because, due to perhaps various representations in the media
   (movies, TV shows, books, etc.) and various interactions we've had
   with librarians in our lifetimes, we might all have pretty
   well-defined, whether or not accurate, images of what a reference
   librarian is or what a cataloging librarian is, but what about an
   electronic resource librarian? This is something different, right?
   And it's not likely to be a position that's ever really captured and
   presented to the public.

Keep this these questions in mind as you read the material this week.

See you on the boards.

## Reference

Wikoff, K. (2011). Electronics Resources Management in the Academic
Library: A Professional Guide. ABC-CLIO.

[1]:http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/940697515
[2]:https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-03-2018-0047
