# Acquisitions and Collections Development

Hi Class. I've asked you to read much this week because collection development
and acquisitions is a complex problem for electronic resources. To rehash, in
the print-only days, acquiring resources was a *more-than-it-is-now* linear
process. Librarians became aware of an item, sought reviews of the item,
possibly collected it, described it, and then shelved it. And maybe, depending
on the type of the library, weeded it from the collection at some point in the
years to come. But there are many additional vectors to be aware of with
electronic media. First, libraries may not necessarily own digital works (they
may), but different subscription services require different kinds of contracts.
Second, electronic resources (ebooks, journal articles, etc.) require handling
and disseminating differently due to technological and licensing barriers.
Martin et al. (2009) truly nail the issue in their article this week where they
write that:

> As much as we would like to think our primary concerns about collecting are
> based on content, not format, e-resources have certainly challenged many
> long-established notions of how we buy, collect, preserve, and provide access
> to information (p. 217).

Although a world where the format dictates so much makes an intriguing world,
it's problematic and worrisome. We think that content should be king, but we
must ask, how does format either prevent or facilitate access? If you catch the
implicit gotcha there, you can see that we're building a thread between
acquisitions, collections development, and usability, which we'll learn more
about later in the semester.

One thing about this week: in a collection development course, you would
unquestionably focus on content and on the work involved creating creating a
collection development policy. Those things are relevant to the acquisition and
collection of e-resources. However, in a major way, one of the things you should
take away from this week's reading is how much the management of electronic
resources have impacted librarian work flows and how that has shaped, or
reshaped, library organizational hierarchy. I'll provide an organizational chart
for you to discuss, and we'll use it to discuss how electronic resources have
shaped the organizational structure of the library.

The Lamothe (2015) article is good in a different way. Lamothe finds that if an
electronic e-reference source is collected and perpetually updated, then it gets
continually used. If it's a static e-electronic resource (compare, e.g., to a
resource pushed out in PDF, although it could be in HTML), then usage declines.
I hope additional studies pursue this line of questioning because it raises
questions about the expectations that our patrons have about our
content---perhaps something about how *fresh* that content should be.

Lastly, the Open Educational Resources (OER) issue is a hot topic these days.
Textbook prices, as the article by England et al. (2017) notes, have skyrocketed
in recent decades. Some textbooks cost hundreds of dollars, and the problem
impacts both school and academic libraries. UK Libraries has a helpful page
about Open Educational Resources. I'll provide a link here in the transcript and
in the discussion prompt, and that page links to OER content for both types of
libraries, including the [oercommons.org][3]. Explore this information, and
discuss whether libraries ought to collect and acquire these resources (e.g., by
adding records to them in their online public access catalogs), or should they
not be involved at all? This seems like *duh* kind of question, but libraries,
public or academic, have not traditionally collected textbooks. Does this change
the game?

**Links:**

- UK Libraries Organizational Chart:
  [http://libraries.uky.edu/forms/OrgChart.pdf][1]
- Open Educational Resources at UK:
  [http://www.uky.edu/copyright/facultyresources/openeducationalresources][2]
- OER Commons: [https://www.oercommons.org/][3]

[1]:http://libraries.uky.edu/forms/OrgChart.pdf
[2]:http://www.uky.edu/copyright/facultyresources/openeducationalresources
[3]:https://www.oercommons.org/

## References

England, L., Foge, M., Harding, J., & Miller, S. (2017). ERM Ideas
& Innovations. Journal of Electronic Resources Librarianship, 29(2), 110–116.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1941126X.2017.1304767

Lamothe, A. R. (2015). Comparing usage between dynamic and static e-reference
collections. Collection Building, 34(3), 78–88.
https://doi.org/10.1108/CB-04-2015-0006

Martin, H., Robles-Smith, K., Garrison, J., & Way, D. (2009). Methods and
Strategies for Creating a Culture of Collections Assessment at Comprehensive
Universities. Journal of Electronic Resources Librarianship, 21(3–4), 213–236.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19411260903466269
