# Lecture 13: User Experience

[Medieval helpdesk with subtitles][medieval]

[medieval]:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQHX-SjgQvQ

Dickson-Deane and Chen (2018) write that "user experience determines the
quality of an interaction being used by an actor in order to achieve a specific
outcome." Parush (2017) highlights relevant terms like *human-computer
interaction (HCI)* and *usability*. Let's say then that HCI encompasses the
entire domain of interaction between people and computers and how that
interaction is designed, whereas *user experience (UX)* focuses on the quality
of that interaction or an interaction with some thing (like a product). These
are not precise definitions, and some might use the terms *UX* and *HCI*
interchangeably. As ERM librarians, though, it is our job to focus on the
quality of the patron's experience with our electronic services, but this
entails understanding both the systems and technologies involved and the users
interacting with these systems and technologies.

Dickson-Deane and Chen (2018) outline the parameters that are involved with UX.
Let me modify their example and frame it within the context of an ERM
experience for a patron:

  - **Actor**: a user of the web resource, like a library website
  - **Object**: the web resource, or some part of it
  - **Context**: the setting. What's happening? What's the motivation for use?
    What's the background knowledge? What's the action?
  - **User Interface**: the tools made available by the object as well as the
    look and feel. More specificlly, Parush (2017) states that "the user
    interface mediates between the user and computer" and it includes three
    basic components:
    - controls: the tools used to control and interact with the system:
      buttons, menus, voice commands, keyboards, etc
    - displays: the information presented to the user or the hardware used to
      present the information: screens, speakers, etc.
    - interactions and dialogues: the exchange between the system and the user
      including the use of the controls and responding to feedback
  - **Interaction**: what the actor is doing with the UI
  - **(Intended/Expected/Prior) User experience**: the intended or expected use
    of the object. The user's expectations based on prior use.
  - **(Actual) User experience**: the actions that took place; the actions that
    had to be modified based on unintended results.

These parameters would be helpful for devising a UX study that involves
observing patrons interacting with a system and then interviewing them to
complete the details. Note that the same kind of systematic thinking can be
applied to evaluate other user experiences, like those between a librarian and
an electronic resource management system. Often the focus is on patron user
experience, but it's just as important to evaluate UX for librarians.

In any case, these parameters help us step through and highlight the
complicated process of interacting with a computer, generally, or a library
resource, more specifically. And it is due to these complexities and a focus on
the systems that Pennington (2015) argues for a more UX centered approach to
library website design. To emphasize their case, think about your own state of
knowledge of ERM before you started to take this course. For example, a number
of you have experienced and identified a link resolver malfunction when
attempting to access a library resource. The more skill and experience you
acquire with these technologies, the more likely you will be able to identify
the cause of a malfunction. Without this knowledge, you might instead have
become frustrated. But with the ability to suss out the issue, it becomes
easier to solve and the experience itself involves less anxiety prone. Most
users of these systems will not have any technical knowledge of these systems,
and when they break for them, their frustration with the **experience** might
lead to unfortunate outcomes. For example, they may not retrieve the
information they need; they may not reach out to a librarian; they might stop
using the library's resources in preference for something of inferior quality;
and so forth.

Here's the crux. As you gain more skill and expertise with these systems, you
will eventually lose the ability to see these systems as a novice user, and
that distance will only grow over time. It is therefore, as Pennington (2015)
argues, important to gather data from users. User experience research is user
centered.

The second article by Pennington, Chapman, Fry, Deschenes, and McDonald (2016)
is a contribution from four librarians with theoretical and practical
suggestions for UX research. Both Pennington and Chapman note the best way to
measure UX or detect UX issues is to conduct research with users, but this
isn't always possible due to financial, time, or other constraints. However,
there is a wealth of research on UX and absent the ability to conduct research,
locating prior research and applying that research to your setting is
paramount. Drawing from the literature, Chapman describes several important UX
principles that include:

 - chunking
 - highlighting and prominence
 - KISS
 - choice simplification
 - choice reduction

In addition to user studies and prior research, libraries possess a wealth of
data to explore and this data could provide a lot of insight. The same caveat
applies that Chapman described: if only you have time to analyze the data. But
Fry points out that you can access library data about location of user, device
type, resource use, and more. (We'll talk about privacy issues at the end of
the semester.) Furthermore, here's where the Browning (2015) article is
helpful. Whereas Fry describes what we can learn from data about usage,
Browning describes what we can learn from data about breakage. Both kinds of
data can offer us a substantial understanding about user experience.

If you can conduct a user study, then Deschenes offers helpful tips on
recruiting users. Remember that the users that you recruit should be actual
users of the systems. If you are interested in why some segments of the
population do not use the library's resources, then that would be a different
kind of study.

I agree with McDonald that despite having around 30 or so years of experience
with web-based electronic resources, more with other types of electronic
resources that existed prior to the web and that were based on the then
internet, on optical disks, etc., we are still in the throws of disruption.
There's a lot yet to learn about design for the web, just like there's a lot
left to learn about how to design a home or office, and nothing will be settled
for a while. Although I doubt if there will be any single dominate user
experience or user interface, since there are many cultures and backgrounds and
experiences, I'm fairly sure the low hanging fruit problems will work out
eventually. Remember though that 95% of the cause of all of this is due to
copyright issues, which necessitate the entire electronic resource ecosystem
and the complications that are introduced by having to work with vendors who
work with different, but overlapping, publishers, etc. If something were to
change about copyright, then it's a whole new ballgame.

On a final note, you might be wondering how *information seeking* is related to
*HCI* and to *UX*. Anytime we interact with a computer (broadly speaking) in
order to seek information, then we have an overlap. But there are areas of
non-overlap, too. We don't always use computers to look for information and we
don't always look for information on computers. *UX* is like this, too. *UX* is
not always about computers but can be about user experience generally. I bring
this up because if you do become involved with *UX* work at a library (or
elsewhere), then I'd encourage you to refer also to the information seeking and
related literature when it's appropriate to do so.

## References

Browning, S. (2015). Data, Data, Everywhere, nor Any Time to Think: DIY
Analysis of E-Resource Access Problems. Journal of Electronic Resources
Librarianship, 27(1), 26–34. https://doi.org/10.1080/1941126X.2015.999521

Dickson-Deane, C., & Chen, H.-L. (Oliver). (2018). Understanding User
Experience. In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.),
Http://services.igi-global.com.ezproxy.uky.edu/resolvedoi/resolve.aspx?doi=10.4018/978-1-5225-2255-3.ch661
(Fourth Edition, pp. 7599–7608). IGI Global.
http://www.igi.global.com/chapter/understanding-user-experience/184455

Parush, A. (2017). Human-computer interaction. In S. G. Rogelberg (Ed.), The
SAGE Encyclopedia of Industrial and Organizational Psychology (2nd edition, pp.
669–674). SAGE Publications, Inc. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781483386874.n229

Pennington, B. (2015). ERM UX: Electronic Resources Management and the User
Experience. Serials Review, 41(3), 194–198.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00987913.2015.1069527

Pennington, B., Chapman, S., Fry, A., Deschenes, A., & McDonald, C. G. (2016).
Strategies to Improve the User Experience. Serials Review, 42(1), 47–58.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00987913.2016.1140614
