# Desperately Seeking an ERM Librarian
## Date: Wed 16 Jan 2019 

Class, this week we read two articles that analyze electronic resource
librarian job advertisements in order to provide an understanding of how
the job has changed over the years.

Although these articles were published a handful of years ago and will
likely someday be of historical interest, since they do an interesting
job of capturing the ER job description, I wouldn't call them dated.
It's true that the technology has advanced since, but their most recent
descriptions of ER jobs are still pretty on the mark. 

That said, times change. One of the biggest changes since 2012, when
Harnett's data ends, is that more technology has moved to the cloud and
less of it resides on on-site servers. This will have important
implications. One of those implications is that libraries will (and this
is a hypothesis) require less local IT skill sets on hand because the
work of installing, maintaining, and updating the software will reside
on remote systems that are hosted by the vendors instead of on on-site
systems. This isn't necessarily a good or bad thing. It could mean (and
this is another hypothesis) more work in other on-site areas where that
work requires a different sort of advanced skill sets. Specifically,
hosted means that the software isn't purchased but leased, and leasing
involves repeated negotiations. Thus, the kind of work that may
increase, as more software is hosted on the cloud, might be the kind of
work that requires strong communication skills, strong negotiating
skills, a good understanding of how licensing works, as more is
licensed, and like.

Even though IT continues to be outsourced, this doesn't mean that we can
become lax in our understanding of how the technology works -- that
which requires a thorough understanding of the *electronic* in
electronic resources -- just as we can't become lax in how librarianship
works even though librarians answer fewer basic reference questions than
they did in previous years. What I mean is that -- in order to
communicate this topic well, to negotiate well, and to sign licenses
that are beneficial to our stakeholders, it still helps to understand
and to be adept at the tech so that we aren't bamboozled in those
negotiations. Also, if something goes wrong, like with the link resolver
technology, we have to learn how to identify the likely culprit; that
is, that it is the link resolver technology and not something else, like
the OPAC technology.

This week I want you to think about these job advertisement studies in
relation to what you know now about electronic resources as well as in
relation to the kinds of advertisements you've seen. By the time this
lecture is released you may have seen some ads sent on the SERIALST
mailing list that I've asked you to subscribe to this semester -- in
case none have been forwarded while you've been subscribed, I'll share
some that I've seen. Some of you may be graduating soon and are likely
looking for employment. If so, feel free to comment on your experience
with such advertisements. In essence, think about where you see yourself
in these advertisements and how they impact you.

Although you've only learned about a lot of these technologies
abstractly, that is, most of you haven't had a chance to learn the back
ends, that doesn't disqualify you from this exercise. You've gathered
enough of abstract knowledge to know enough, and when you add that with
your front end knowledge (that is, your use of these technologies as
students, users, etc.), you have enough to be capable of adding some
self-context. In short, this is the second part of our exercise in
self-reflection; it's an attempt to flush out how we have internalized
the information we've learned this semester and convert it into
knowledge that we can use as librarians or as information professionals,
writ-large. Just a hint of what's to come in the future, I'm attempting
to install our own electronic resource management software for us to
explore and test. More on that in coming weeks.

We'll soon move away from reflective questions and get our hands dirty
with specific technologies, licensing, etc., but for now let's think
about the following:

- Where do you think you stand in comparison to ERM job ads?
    - Where are you strong?
    - Where would you like to improve?
- What can you (and we, as a course community) do to help each of you
  get there?
    - What's your path?
    - What can you practice?
