# Constant Disruption
## Date: Wed 23 Jan 2019 

The first listed reading we have this week is by Marshall Breeding.
Astute observers will note that Breeding is one of the first people
cited in the two additional readings we have this week. We'll read more
from Breeding later in the semester, but I bring him up now because he
also oversees a website titled [Library Technology Guides][1] at
librarytechnology.org. If you would like to keep abreast of the recent
news on the electronic resource industry, Breeding's website should be
at the top of your list.

Breeding's *What is ERM?* article is a good one to start off with this
week. He provides not only a nice outline of the various components of
electronic resources, but he also provides some historical context for
those components. One caveat: Breeding, as well as the other two
articles on our list this week, is focused on academic libraries. I'm
afraid that there isn't much literature (that I have seen, at least)
that provides the same kind of information from other library types. I
think this is because librarians in other libraries publish less often
than academic librarians, who are often required to publish to acquire
tenure, and when they do publish, they generally publish on other
topics. However, the same processes that our articles describe generally
hold for other types of libraries. Differences in processes and in some
details will arise, though, because of organizational or other
contextual issues. For example, public libraries are often tightly
connected to municipalities or county governments, as well as to their
state libraries. Not only does that raises organizational challenges,
but it also highlights the fact that municipal, county, or state laws
will define how some processes must be handled and who must handle them.
The same is true for public schools, and in such cases, school boards
and school districts will likely be involved. Other issues may impact
things a bit too. As some of you have noted, public libraries provide
more ebooks and audiobooks and less ejournals than academic libraries.
That will change the emphasis on some aspects of the ERM work flow.

That said, I understand that some of the terms he uses and the
technologies he describes might still be foreign to some of you. I'm not
going to rehash or summarize these articles here -- we'll simply discuss
them on the boards, but I do want to spend some time providing some
additional background information -- and highlight some of the things to
look for in these three articles.

As I've previously mentioned, librarians have been migrating to some
kind of electronic management since the 1970s. Breeding mentions this,
too. It actually started well before this -- in fact, I published a
paper a few years ago that provides a historical account of the first
library automation project, which took place in the 1930s with punched
cards. However, around the 1960s, the primary use of computers was to
manage circulation, and then patron records. In the early 1970s, tools
became available to manage and search bibliographic records. That is,
computers were first used mostly to manage circulation of books, then to
add patron records, which allowed patrons to check out works
electronically, and finally to search for works. If a work of interest
was located using these tools, then that work could be retrieved from
the shelves or ordered via interlibrary loan by snail mail. Full text,
by and large, came much later and is largely the result of the
introduction of the web in the early 1990s, which at its heart is
nothing more than a big document retrieval system, as well as with the
introduction of bigger storage devices, such as CD-ROMs.

In the process of migrating from print to electronic, all sorts of
things had to change, but they all rest on the major premise of all
librarianship -- *that we organize information in order to retrieve
information*. Although you may have often heard that libraries are
ancient things, libraries and librarianship didn't truly modernize until
the 1920s and 1930s when some in the profession began to hone in on the
major complexities and challenges involved in organizing and retrieving
information. The challenges with organizing and retrieving information
that they identified nearly 100 years ago were indeed major and
problematic, but fortuitous, because it gave rise to what we know
called *library science*.

Yet consider that when those people laid the groundwork for a library
science, librarians only managed print and the primary means of
accessing print collections was through a physical building. With the
introduction of the computers in the 1960s and with networking
technologies in the 1990s, issues with organizing and retrieving
information grew exponentially, and indeed, this exponential increase in
complex issues launched an entire new field, what we now call
*information science*.

All right -- back to the ground level. Let me highlight some of the key
terms in Breeding's article. They include:

* Finding aids
* Knowledge bases
* OpenURL link resolvers
* ERM systems
* Library service platforms
* Integrated library systems (ILS)

Unless you already have some solid experience with these things, and
even after reading Breeding's nice article, these terms may still be
abstract for you all. So, this week, you have two major tasks:

1. Find real, practical examples. Pick one or two of the above terms and
   see how they work in practice. Then come back here and tell us what
   you found.
2. Locate how these terms appear in either the Cote & Ostergaard (2017)
   article or the Fu & Carmen (2015). Note other terms that may appear
   in those two articles and comment on the role they play in the ERM
   work flow and the migration process.

As you work on this, I ask that you pay attention to the emphasis on
work flow. We're reading the Cote & Ostergaard article and the Fu &
Carmen article not just because migrating to new systems is a big deal,
but also because it's significant that there's a need to write and
publish articles on migration topics. In the print era, there were some
cases where librarians might migrate to a new system. For example, some
research libraries in the U.S. started off by classifying their works
using the Dewey Decimal Classification system, but then began to convert
to the Library of Congress Classification system. This was no small
task, but it was also not that common. Today, migration is big business,
so to speak, in the library world because the technology changes so fast
and because there are a number of competing electronic resource
management products that librarians have to choose from, and do when
those products provide advantages to their users, communities, and
themselves.

[1]:https://librarytechnology.org/
