# Desperately Seeking an ERM Librarian

## Introduction

Class, in this week's lecture, I will:

- help frame the readings for this week 
- discuss the readings, and
- list some questions to guide our discussion for the week.

Our goal this week is to understand how the job of electronic resource
management has changed throughout the years and to develop an idea about where
we are headed as we go forward.

### Frame the Readings

This week we read two articles that analyze electronic resource librarian job
advertisements. You will also see that in the reading list for this week, I
also provide a link to the NASIG core competencies page for electronic resource
librarianship. It might be helpful to review this page before you engage the
readings so that you have the right background knowledge ahead of time.

These readings are of interest since they capture a description of electronic
resource librarianship that is continually evolving. They are not dated even
though electronic resource management is constantly evolving with the
technology. There are too many social, political, and economic conditions that
have stayed about the same and these fixed conditions fix the work of the ERM
librarian, who is, nevertheless, adapting to new technologies and work flows.
Our Murdoch reading makes this point.

Thus, though the technology has advanced (or at least changed), the
descriptions and duties of ER jobs are still on the mark. I posted links to
current job announcements in the discussion forum to help support this
argument. The job announcements were emailed via the SERIALST email list and
are not current job openings, but they were current within the last three
years. To stay current about the position overall, about the specific duties
involved, I encourage you to bookmark and stay abreast of relevant journals in
the area. In addition to the two titles we're reading this week, pay attention
and bookmark the [Journal of Electronic Resources Librarianship][JERL].

### Discuss the Readings 

A big change since 2012, when Harnett's research ends, is that technology has
moved to the cloud, and we manage less technology on on-site servers, where
those servers might be managed by library IT (or other IT). This has had
substantial implications and I think we should hypothesize about what they may
be. One implication is libraries will require fewer local, advanced IT skill
sets on hand because the work of installing, maintaining, and updating the
software will reside on remote systems hosted by the vendors instead of at
on-site locations. Although I state this as a hypothesis, we already know that
this statement rings true for some of you. This isn't necessarily a good or bad
thing---at the very least it indicates a shift in the skills needed by
librarians and not necessarily a loss. Along those lines, we can state another
hypothesis: it could mean other skill sets become more dominant. Specifically,
hosted software means the software isn't purchased but leased, and leasing
involves outside vendors who must have the technological skill sets need to
manage the technology. But it also means negotiations between librarians and
those vendors. Thus, the kind of work that may increase, as more software is
hosted on the cloud, might be the kind of work requiring strong communication
skills, strong negotiating skills, a good understanding of how licensing works
as more is licensed, a good understanding of copyright and contract law work, a
good understanding of how electronic resource collections work and interoperate
across platforms, and more. However, again, this can be complicated. Last year
there was an email on the SERIALT listserv by a librarian that asked whether
librarians have retained or hold negotiating and contract signing powers, and
the responses were mixed. Some librarians had the jurisdiction but many had
lost it. Even under this scenario, though, technological understanding is still
necessary in order to negotiate the best deal for a library's stakeholders and
to acquire the best and most seamless product needed by library users.

Even though IT continues to be outsourced, this doesn't mean that we can become
lax in our understanding of how the technology works---that which requires a
thorough understanding of the *electronic* in electronic resources---just as we
can't become lax in how librarianship works even though librarians answer fewer
reference questions than they did in previous years (i.e., you still need to
know how to respond systematically and thoroughly to research and reference
questions). What I mean is that, in order to communicate this topic well, to
negotiate well, and to sign licenses that are beneficial to our stakeholders,
it helps to understand and be adept at the tech so that we are not bamboozled
in those negotiations. Also, if something goes wrong, like with the link
resolver technology, we have to learn how to identify the likely culprit; that
is, whether the technological issue is the link resolver technology and not
something else, like the OPAC technology.

This week I want you to think about these job advertisement studies in relation
to what you know now about electronic resources as well as in relation to the
kinds of advertisements you've seen since whenever you started paying attention
to them. By the time this lecture is released you may have seen some job ads
sent out on the [SERIALST][SERIALST] mailing list that I've asked you to
subscribe to this semester (and as mentioned above, in case none have been
forwarded while you've been subscribed, I'll share some that I've seen). Some
of you may be graduating soon and are looking for employment. If so, feel free
to comment on your experience with such advertisements. In essence, think about
where you see yourself in these advertisements and how they impact you.
Alternatively, some of you already have jobs in libraries---those may be
considered also, in hindsight.

Although you may have only learned about these technologies that are discussed
in these readings in the abstract, as many of you have noted in your course
introductions, it might be the case that most of you haven't had a chance to
learn the electronic resource back ends, that doesn't disqualify you from our
attempts to start reflecting on this part of librarianship. As library users of
these technologies, you have gathered enough abstract knowledge to know enough,
and when you add to this front end knowledge (that is, your use of these
technologies as students, users, etc.), you have enough to be capable of adding
some self-context. In short, this is the second part of our exercise in
self-reflection; it's an attempt to flush out how we have internalized the
information we'll learn this semester and convert it into knowledge that we can
use as librarians or as information professionals, writ-large. Just a hint of
what's to come in the future, we will use and get some exposure to electronic
resource management software in an upcoming week.

### Questions for Discussion

We'll soon move away from reflective questions and get our hands dirty with
specific technologies, licensing, etc., but for now let's reflect on the
following questions:

- Where do you think you stand in comparison to ERM job ads and to [NASIG Core
  Competencies][NCC]?
  - Where are you strong?
  - Where would you like to improve?
- What can you (and we, as a course community) do to help each of you get
  there?
  - What's your path?
  - What can you practice?

[JERL]:https://www.tandfonline.com/toc/wacq20/current
[NCC]:https://www.nasig.org/Competencies-Eresources
[SERIALST]:https://www.nasig.org/SERIALST
