# Market and Economics

Add:

Grain, A. the. (2022, July 18). Legally Speaking—States
Unsuccessful in Providing Financial Relief of eBook Terms
for Libraries. Charleston Hub.
https://www.charleston-hub.com/2022/07/legally-speaking-states-unsuccessful-in-providing-financial-relief-of-ebook-terms-for-libraries/

Add publisher's perspective:

Sisto, M. C. (2022). Publishing and Library E-Lending: An
Analysis of the Decade Before Covid-19. Publishing Research
Quarterly, 38(2), 405–422.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12109-022-09880-7

## Copyright and Budgets

This week we're reading a piece on the ebook market (Sanchez, 2015), and one on
the academic journal market (Bosch, Albee, & Henderson, 2018). We'll learn how
each impacts library budgets.

To understand Sanchez's article, we need to address some copyright topics. In
the next part of this lecture, I'll discuss copyright, the first sale doctrine,
and show how digital works have disrupted some basic ways that libraries
function. The article by Bosch, Albee, and Henderson discusses a similar case
among academic libraries, but with academic or scholarly journals as the focal
point. I'll address some of the citation metrics they discuss.

### Copyright

Copyright law grants a monopoly to the person or corporate owner of an
intellectual property. That is, the copyright owner has exclusive rights over
the material that they own, where *they* could be a person or an organizational
entity. Section 106 of the law grants copyright owners the following rights:

> (1) to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or phonorecords;
>
> (2) to prepare derivative works based upon the copyrighted work;
>
> (3) to distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the
> public by sale or other transfer of ownership, or by rental, lease, or
> lending;
>
> (4) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works,
> pantomimes, and motion pictures and other audiovisual works, to perform the
> copyrighted work publicly;
>
> (5) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works,
> pantomimes, and pictorial, graphic, or sculptural works, including the
> individual images of a motion picture or other audiovisual work, to display
> the copyrighted work publicly; and
>
> (6) in the case of sound recordings, to perform the copyrighted work publicly
> by means of a digital audio transmission.

Source: [Copyright Section 106][sec_106]

These exclusive rights are all encompassing, and intentionally designed to
allow copyright owners a monopoly of their property. In principle and under
some constraints, this is a good thing. However, there are some implications
that we should consider.

In short, if those exclusive rights were followed without limitations, then it
would mean that the exchange of money for a work between a copyright holder and
a buyer for something like a printed book or a DVD would not entail a transfer
of ownership of that physical copy; that is, it would not allow the buyer of
the physical item any distribution rights of the item once the first exchange
has been made. Under such a scenario, libraries would be able to buy physical
books but would not be able to lend them.

The [First Sale Doctrine][first_sale] helps avoid the issue granted by the
full-blown list of exclusive rights granted by copyright ownership. Because of
the first sale doctrine, made a precedent in the early 20th century and then
[codified into law in 1976][copy_1976], you, I, or a library may buy a physical
copy of a work, like a book, a DVD, a painting, and literally own that specific
copy. First sale doctrine does not grant us reproduction rights, as they are
listed in Section 106 of the copyright law, but it does allow us to distribute
the singular, physical representation or embodiment of the work that we have
purchased. Thus, this first sale doctrine is why libraries were able to thrive
throughout the 20th century, lend material, and preserve it. More mundanely,
it's also why I can buy a book at a bookstore and later give it away or sell it
to someone after I've finished it.

The digital medium makes things messier, as it tends to do. There are two big
reasons for this. First, digital works are not subject to the same
distributions constraints that physical works are subject to, and the first
sale doctrine is about distribution rights and not reproduction rights. If I
have a physical copy of some book and give you my copy of that book, then I no
longer have that copy. However, if I have a copy of a digital file, then as we
all know, it's relatively trivial for me to share that file with you without
losing access to my own copy. Since digital works can be copied and distributed
without anyone losing access to their copies or even to the original, the First
Sale Doctrine does not apply. In the digital space, there are far fewer
limitations on supply, including on lending.

Second, many digital works are like software, or at least, they are fully
intertwined with the software needed to display them. This is true for all
kinds of documents, like HTML pages, which need a web browser or text editor to
read them and perhaps also other technologies, like JavaScript; or audio files,
which need some a media player to listen to them. But let's consider ebooks as
an example. Ebooks arrive in all shapes and sizes. Project Gutenberg
distributes ebooks that are in the public domain and in various file formats
that include plain text documents that have no presentation markup like bold,
italics, and like, HTML documents with markup, XML documents like EPUB, and
then also PDFs and others. Why so many file formats? Text is text, right, and
in the print space, a book is simply printed on a page, even if it's sometimes
printed on different sized pages or using different type settings. But these
various markups exist because they each offer technological or presentational
advantages and are often tied to specific pieces of software.

This is especially true for proprietary file formats, like the ones that Amazon
created for use only on Kindles, or the popular MP3 file format for audio
recordings that only recently became patent free. While file formats like these
may not be necessarily counted as software, depending on how we define
software, but more like data structures, it is certainly true that file formats
and the specific software applications that display can be completely
intertwined. If you are old enough, you may remember the headaches caused with
files created as **.doc** in some early version of Microsoft Word that later
failed to display properly in a future Microsoft Word version or in some other
word document software. WordPerfect 5.1 was a popular word processing
applications in the 1990s, and it's not clear if files created with that
application, or other popular word processing applications at that time, would
open today, [at least without intervention][intervention].

In short, these complexities introduce obstacles to the first sale doctrine and
raise other copyright issues because of the connection to software, which is
also often copyrighted. The result is that copyright holders and publishers
have little financial interest in selling actual digital copies of works, since
they cannot prevent future distribution without special technologies, and
instead are more motivated to license material and sometimes explicitly tie
that material to specific pieces of software and hardware, like the Kindle,
which would have to be bought, and that adds additional expense.

What does this mean for libraries in the digital age? It means that libraries
buy less and rent or license more, and renting means that they continually pay
for something for as long as they want access to it. As Sanchez (2015) puts it,
"At its simplest, this takes the form of paying x dollars per year per title
during the length of the contract." When the total supply of works increases,
e.g., the total number of published books increases, as they do each year, then
it means renting more and more without ever completely acquiring. When budgets
are cut or are stagnant, this ultimately means a decline in the collection a
library has to offer, or if not a decline in the collection, then cuts in some
other areas of a library, like the number of librarians or other staff. This is
the conundrum that Sanchez raises in his article.

If that alone were the issue, maybe librarians could discern other sustainable
ways to proceed, but Sanchez raises additional issues and questions: what if
publishers raise the prices for digital content at an annual rate faster than
what they already raise for print content (reasonable assumption)? If so, does
that mean that librarians will be able to afford fewer titles, digital or
print, unless they raise their budgets, and, as they weed, how would that
impact the physical space of the library? See figure 2.3, specifically, from
Sanchez's article. The plot shows just how much could be lost and how little
gained if the forecasts Sanchez discusses come true.

Keep all of this in mind as you process Sanchez's article. You can even connect
it to some discussions you've already had about accessing digital content.
Specifically, there are many ways to put constraints on the supply of an item
in the digital landscape, as opposed to limiting supply in the physical space,
which include fewer methods. That is, it's relatively easy for publishers and
others to restrict the supply of physical works. They simply have to limit how
many of those physical works are manufactured (e.g., the number of print runs).
But given the nature of digital content, restricting supply is driven by the
technologies available to do so, and since there are so many publishers and
distribution points, then each one of these points will often create their own
unique type of constraint on the supply. The result is that there will be a
number of confusing methods implemented to limit constraint, even if these
limitations are marketed as selling points. In practice, this may mean that
only a limited number of people may "check" out a work from a library at one
time, or access a database at one time, and so forth. Thus, the budget issue
has an impact on access and usability.

As a bonus, the last time I taught this course, I reached out to Joseph Sanchez
and interviewed him. Please enjoy the interview! It's long but it was a very
fun exchange.

Read more about copyright:

[https://www.copyright.gov/title17/92chap1.html][copy_ch1]

Although ebooks likely represent the biggest impact on public library budgets,
academic libraries are largely concerned with scholarly journals. Like Sanchez
(2015), Bosch, Albee, & Henderson (2018) show that the major issue here is that
academic library budgets are declining or holding flat, even though prices
continue to increase for journal titles and though the number of published
articles increase. This raises an interesting phenomenon---that although
researchers are hurt by the lack of access to research, researchers are also
part of the cause of the increase simply because they continue to publish more
and more. Ironically, the result of that rate of increase is less access for
many.

The authors also note that part of the drive to publish includes a drive to
publish in so-called *prestigious* journal titles, where *prestigious* is
determined by how well cited the title is. The authors refer to a few
citation-based metrics that the research community uses to determine prestige.
These include the long-established *Impact Factor*, which can be examined in
the *Journal Citation Reports* (JCR) provided by Clarivate Analytics, as well
as newer ones, such as the *Eigenfactor* and the *Article Influence Score*,
which can also be examined in JCR (the eigenfactor.org site is not well
updated, at the time of this writing).

One motivation for using a citation metric as the basis of evaluating journal
titles is because citation metrics indicate, at some level, the use of the
title. That is, a citation to an article in a journal title means, ideally,
that the authors citing that article have read the article. Historically, when
Eugene Garfield invented the *Impact Factor*, it was partly so as a tool for
librarians to use in collection management because he recognized this use-based
theory of citations.

However, citation metrics should never be the sole or even primary tool for
such purposes, though. While they may provide good information, there are many
caveats. First, there are different fields of research, and some fields cite at
different rates and at different volumes than other fields, and also for
different reasons. This is why, in Table 5 of the Bosch, Albee, and Henderson
(2018) article, the cost per cite for journals in the Philosophy & Religion
category are so much higher that the cost per cite of titles in other
categories. Authors in P&R simply have different citation and publishing
behaviors than authors in other categories. Second, citations do not capture
all uses of a journal. For example, there are many journal titles that I might
use in my courses but may not use in my research, and this is true for other
faculty, yet citation metrics won't reflect that kind of use. The authors refer
to *altmetrics*, which was invented to help capture additional non-citing uses
of scholarly products, but altmetrics is still in its infancy and is largely
dependent on data sources and scholarly behavior that are problematic
themselves. Third, there are various issues with the metrics themselves. The
*Impact Factor* is based on a calculation that is outdated and not a very
appropriate statistical measure. The other calculations were created to address
that but may have other problems. And four, the use of the metrics, regardless
of which one, tends to drive publishing behavior---such that journal titles
with higher metrics tend to attract more submissions and more attention, thus
driving more citations to them. Thus, citation based metrics are comparable to
a kind of capitalist economic system where, as the sociologist of science
Robert Merton noted, [the richer get richer (in citations) and the poor get
poorer][matthew_effect]. The issue then is that prestige, defined in this way,
does not necessarily indicate quality---just use.

The authors also discuss some issues with *Gold Open Access* and the idea that
Gold OA may compound the cost problem. This is where authors pay a publication
fee, or an article processing charge (APC), once a manuscript has been
submitted and accepted by a journal (there are other types of Gold OA cost
models). We can do a quick off the cuff and rough calculation to see why this
might compound the problem. As an example, *PLOS ONE* is one of the largest
gold OA journals and charges an [APC of $1,695 USD][pub_fees] (that's $100 more
than it cost about a year ago). In 2018, 32 papers were published in PLOS ONE
that included at least one author from the University of Kentucky, totaling
$51,040 in APCs for the 50 total institutions that were associated with these
papers. Thus, this amounts to about $1020 per institution, paid for by the
authors and not libraries. For UK authors, this also amounts to over $32,640
spent on APCs (32 * $1020). This is about $27K more than the average price of
the most expensive category, Chemistry, as reported in Table 1 of the reading.
I'll leave it at that.

In a follow-up video, I'll demonstrate some tools used to examine the discussed
metrics.

[sec_106]:https://www.copyright.gov/title17/92chap1.html#106
[first_sale]:https://www.copyright.gov/docs/resaleroyalty/
[copy_1976]:http://www.copyright.gov/title17/92chap1.html#109
[copy_ch1]:https://www.copyright.gov/title17/92chap1.html
[pub_fees]:https://www.plos.org/publication-fees
[intervention]:http://www.columbia.edu/~em36/wpdos/wptoword.html
[matthew_effect]:http://www.garfield.library.upenn.edu/merton/matthew1.pdf

## References

Bosch, S., Albee, B., & Henderson, K. (2018). Death by 1,000 Cuts. Library
Journal, 143(7), 28–33.

Sanchez, J. (2015). Chapter 2. Forecasting Public Library E-content Costs.
Library Technology Reports, 51(8), 9–15. Retrieved from
[https://journals.ala.org/index.php/ltr/article/view/5833](https://journals.ala.org/index.php/ltr/article/view/5833)
