# Chapter 1: Electronic Resource Librarians

Many of my incoming students are unaware that there is a specific role in
libraries for electronic resource management, yet electronic resource
management (ERM) in libraries plays a vital albeit invisible role. ERM
librarians ensure the organized acquisition, access, and control of digital
resources, and this requires them to manage e-books, online journals,
databases, and other digital content. This work is increasingly complex,
especially as libraries continue adapt to and contribute to the shape of the
digital age.

While many are aware of the classic cataloger and reference librarian,
electronic resource management librarianship is a specialized field that
specifically focuses on the above challenges. These professionals employ a
blend of technical skills and understanding of information access to negotiate
licenses, oversee subscription renewals, troubleshoot access problems, and work
collaboratively with other library staff to integrate electronic resources into
the library system. This specialized work requires them to be generalists, too.
That is, they must be aware of and support those other library staff and the
library's mission to provide seamless access to information, adapting to the
evolving needs of the academic community and the wider public.

This chapter introduces students to the field of electronic resource
management. It begins with a section that discusses different perspectives of
electronic resource management. Section 1.2 covers the kinds of activities ERM
librarians engage in at their libraries. Section 1.3 argues that regardless of
ERM librarian's specific skills and duties, a key characteristic of the field,
given its need to work with continuously emerging technologies, is one of
*constant disruption*.
